---
title: The C Journal - 01. Introduction
description: >-
  Learning a low-level language like C provides a better understanding of
  computer architecture and memory management. Here's my documented journey of
  learning C.
date: "2023-04-06T02:21:29+06:00"
tags:
  - c
  - the-c-journal
  - journal
categories:
  - story
---

This series is meant to document my journey in learning C. So, all the
fundamentals, concepts, and project implementations are to be a part of this.
I've chosen to learn C as it is one of the cornerstones of modern-day
computing. To learn about low-level computing and memory management, I've
embarked on this journey to learn C.

What better way to learn C than by reading a book published by the very creator
of the language? The book in question is "The C Programming Language" by Brian
Kernighan and Dennis Ritchie.

## The "Preface"

In the book, the preface describes the origins of C and how it has shaped the
world of programming. It also mentions the authority in charge of standardizing
the language.

C is a general-purpose programming language with an economy of expression,
modern control flow, and data structures and, a rich set of operators. It was
originally designed for and implemented on the UNIX operating system by Dennis
Ritchie.

ANSI is the American National Standards Institute and it defines a standard
library for the C programming language.

The standard that ANSI defines is what compiler authors of the language follow.
As a general-purpose programming language, C has a concise syntax for
expressing ideas with powerful control flow constructs and operators to perform
computation and manipulation of data in programs.

## The "Introduction"

Here in the introduction, the book gives an overview of the functionality
available in the language and how they behave.

The C language was influenced by BCPL which was written by Ken Thompson in 1970
for the first UNIX system on the DEC PDP-7. Although the BCPL and B languages
were typeless, C provides a variety of data types and a hierarchy of derived
data types created with pointers, arrays, structures, and, unions. The
fundamental types in C are characters and, integers and floating point
numbers of several sizes.

In C, expressions are formed with operators and operands that evaluate to a
value. Any expression in C including an assignment or a function call can be a
statement i.e a complete instruction that performs some action.

Pointers in C provide machine-independent address arithmetic. Using the memory
addresses of values arithmetic operations can be performed such as adding or
subtracting values, without worrying about the underlying hardware architecture
of the machine.

C provides the fundamental control-flow constructs required for well-structured
programs. They are as follows.

- `{}` - statement grouping
- `if-else` - decision making
- `switch` - selecting one of a set of possible cases
- `while`, `for`, and `do` - looping with the termination test at the top or at
  the bottom
- `break` - early loop exit

Functions in C can return values of basic types, structures, unions, or
pointers. Any function can also be called recursively but, function definitions
may not be nested. Although, variables can be declared in a block-structured
fashion and local variables are typically "automatic" or created anew with each
invocation, meaning they are allocated memory with each call to the function
and cleared thereafter.

Variables declared can be scoped to be internal to a function, external but
known only within a single source file, or visible to the entire program.

In C, the preprocessor is a program that processes the source code before it's
compiled.

C is platform-independent, meaning it is not tied to any one operating system
or machine. The notion of a general-purpose programming bears that the language
should have all the essentials for computation and I/O operations. In the case
of the C programming language, it is taken care of by the implementations of C
which provide a set of functions that allocate and free memory, READ and WRITE
operations, disk and file access, etc. Otherwise, the language itself is pretty
barebones and relies on the arithmetic and logical operators implemented by the
machine. There's no heap or garbage collection in C, memory management is done
manually.

The ANSI standard for C or "ANSI C" was completed late in 1988. One of its most
significant contributions of the standard was a library to accompany the C
language. The standard library functions need to be called explicitly and can
be discarded if not needed. Most of the functionality can be written in C
except for the operating system details which they conceal but other than that,
the functions are portable.

Programs that can be run without change on a variety of hardware are called
portable programs. A C program can run on any machine that supports C. The
compilers need to be adjusted for the platform only, the program usually
doesn't require any modification.

C is not a strongly-typed language. It can perform implicit conversion of data
types. C retains the basic philosophy that programmers know what they are
doing; it only requires that they state their intentions explicitly.

## Final Thoughts

In reading just the preface and introduction of the book I've gained knowledge
about what the language is and what are some of its features. I'm excited to
learn about what great things you can do with the language and as the authors
say -

> The best way to learn a new language is to write programs in it.

## References

- Notes
  - [Preface](https://github.com/jNaimXIII/Books/blob/main/The%20C%20Programming%20Language/notes/preface.md)
  - [Introduction](https://github.com/jNaimXIII/Books/blob/main/The%20C%20Programming%20Language/notes/introduction.md)
