---
title: The C Journal - 02. A Basic Program
description: I learn how a C program is formed and the things it can do.
date: "2023-04-10T18:48:13+06:00"
tags:
  - c
  - the-c-journal
  - journal
categories:
  - the-c-journal
math: true
---

I've now gone through the "1.1 Getting Started" and "1.2 Variables and
Arithmetic Expressions" sections of _The C Programming Language_. It gave me
practical examples of programs and the parts that make them do what they do.

## C Programs

A program in C, whatever its size, consists of functions and variables. A
function Contains statements that specify the computing operations to be done,
and variables store values used during the computation.

`main` function is a special function where the execution of the program
begins. Every C program must have a main function.

```c
main()
{
    /* code */
}
```

External libraries can be added to a C program via the `include` keyword
followed by the library. The following code shows how to import the standard
I/O library. `printf` is not part of the C language; there is no input or
output defined in C itself. `printf` is just a useful function from the
standard library of functions that are normally accessible to C programs.

```c
#include <stdio.h>
```

A sequence of characters in double quotes is called a character string or
string constant. `printf` is a library function that prints output, usually a
string of characters defined inside quotes. the following code shows `printf`
being used to output the word "soup".

```c
printf("soup");
```

One method of communicating data between functions is for the calling function
to provide a list of values, called arguments, to the function it calls. The
parentheses after the function name surround the argument list. A function is
called by naming it, followed by a parenthesized list of arguments. The
following code calls `printf` with two arguments, a string and an int
respectively.

```c
printf("age: %d", 18);
```

`printf` is a general-purpose output formatting function. Its first argument is
a string of characters to be printed, with each `%` indicating where one of the
other arguments is to be substituted, and in what form it is to be printed.

Each `%` construction in the first argument of `printf` is paired with the
corresponding second argument, third argument, etc; they must match up properly
by number and type, or it will provide wrong answers. Passing the width
argument to each `%` construction in the printf statement, the values printed
will be right-justified in their fields. In `printf`, width and precision may
be omitted from a specification.

`printf` recognizes `%d` for int, `%f` for float, `%o` for octal, `%x` for
hexadecimal, `%c` for character, `%s` for character string and `%%` for %
itself.

`printf` never supplies a newline automatically, so several calls may be used
to build up an output line in states.

The sequence `\n` in a string is notation for including a newline character,
which when printed advances the output to the left margin on the next line.
`\n` represents only a single character. An escape sequence like `\n` provides
a general and extensible mechanism for representing hard-to-type or invisible
characters. `\t` for tab, `\b` for backspace, `\"` for double quotes, and `\\`
for backslash itself.

The following code shows the use of `printf` in building a multi stage output
within a single line.

```c
printf("a\t");
printf("b\t");
printf("c\t");
printf("d\n");
```

## C Expressions

Aside from functioning code, C programs can have _comments_ which are ignored
by the compiler but are meant for humans to read. Any characters written
between `/*` and `*/` are considered as comments. Comments may appear anywhere
a blank or tab or newline can.

```c
main()
{
    /* program starts here */

    printf("soup"); /* a call to printf */
}
```

Variables in C must be declared before they are used, usually at the beginning
of the function before any executable statements. A declaration announces the
properties of variables; it consists of a type name and a list of variables.
Assignment statements set variables declared to their initial value. Individual
statements in C are terminated by a `;`. If there are no further statements,
the program terminates.

```c
int x, y, z;
x = 1;
y = 2;
z = 3;
```

The type `int` means that the variables listed are integers, by contrast with
`float`, which means floating point, i.e, numbers that may have a fractional
part.

The range for both `int` and `float` depends on the machine. 16-bit `int`s lie
between $-32768$ and $+32765$. A `float` number is typically a 32-bit quantity,
with at least six significant digits and magnitude generally between about
$10^{-38}$ and $10^{+38}$.

Basic data types in C are as follows.

- `char`: character - a single byte
- `short`: short integer
- `long`: long integer
- `double`: double precision floating point

An instruction or a set of instructions can be performed over an over with a
loop. The `while` loop in C operates as follows.

The condition in parentheses is tested. If it is true, the body of the loop is
executed. Then the condition is re-tested, and if true, the body is executed
again. When the test becomes false the loop ends, and execution continues at
the statement that follows the loop. The body of a while can be one or more
statements enclosed in braces or a single statement without braces.

```c
int x, limit;
x = 1;
limit = 10;
while (x < 10)
{
    printf("%d", x);
}
```

The indentation in code emphasizes the logical structure of the program.
Although C compilers do not care about how a program looks, proper indentation
and spacing are critical in making programs easy for people to read. It is
recommended write only one statement per line and using blanks around operators
to clarify grouping.

Using all of the above techniques, the following program was built.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

/* print Fahrenheit-Celsius table
    for fahr = 0, 20, ..., 300 */
main() {
    int fahr, celsius;
    int lower, upper, step;

    lower = 0;      /* lower limit of temperature table */
    upper = 300;    /* upper limit */
    step = 20;      /* step size */

    fahr = lower;
    while (fahr <= upper) {
        celsius = 5 * (fahr - 32) / 9;
        printf("%3d %6d\n", fahr, celsius);
        fahr = fahr + step;
    }
}
```

## Learning Experience

So far I learnt about basic C programs and how to build them. I got
familiarized with how basic data types work and printing formatted output using
the `printf` function. The `while` loop was also a powerful way of repeating
action based on some condition.

## References

- [Notes](https://github.com/jNaimXIII/Books/blob/main/The%20C%20Programming%20Language/chapters/01/notes.md)
