---
title: The C Journal - 03. Characters, Loops and User Input
description: >-
  I count characters in an input, loop over them and produce fun stats.
date: "2023-04-20T15:33:14+06:00"
tags:
  - c
  - the-c-journal
  - journal
categories:
  - the-c-journal
---

After reading the "1.3 The For Statement", "1.4 Symbolic Constants" and "1.5
Character Input and Output" sections of _The C Programming Language_ book, I
got to write programs that take input from the user and manipulate it as
needed.

## Symbolic Constants

It's bad practice to bury "magic numbers" in a program; they convey little
information to someone who might have to read the program later, and they are
hard to change in a systematic way.

A `#define` line defines a symbolic name or symbolic constant to be a
particular string of characters. Any occurrence of the name will be replaced by
the corresponding replacement text. The name has the same form as a variable
name: a sequence of letters and digits that begins with a letter. The
replacement text can be any sequence of characters; is not limited to numbers.

```c
#define SOME_NAME 1
```

Symbolic constant names are conventionally written in upper case so they can be
readily distinguished from lower case variable names. There is no semicolon at
the end of a `#define` line.

## Expressions

In any context where it is permissible to use the value of a variable of some
time, it is also permissible to use a more complicated expression of that type.

```c
int n, m;

n = 1;
m = 2 * n;

printf("%d", m);
printf("%d", 2 * n);
```

In C, any assignment is an expression and has a value, which is the value of
the left hand side after the assignment. An assignment can appear as part of a
larger expression and multiple variables can be assigned the same value as `a =
b = c = 0`.

```c
int a, b, c;

a = b = c = 0;
```

## Loop Statements

The `for` statement is a loop, a generalization of the `while` statement. A
`for` loop has three parts within the parentheses. The first part, the
initialization is done once, before the loop proper is entered. The second part
is the test or condition that controls the loop. This condition is evaluated if
it is true, the body of the loop is executed. Then the increment step is
executed, and the condition re-evaluated. The loop terminates if the condition
becomes false.

```c
for (int i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
{
  printf("%d", i);
}
```

Grammatical rules of C require that a for statement have a body. If none is
required, the isolated semicolon, called a null statement, is there to satisfy
that requirement. It is put on a separate line to make it visible.

The choice between while and for is arbitrary, based on which seems clearer.
The `for` is usually appropriate for loops in which the initialization and
increment are single statements and logically related, since it is more compact
than while and it keeps the loop control statements together in one place.

`while` and `for` loops test at the top of the loop, before proceeding with the
body. If there is nothing to do, nothing is done, even if that means never
going through the loop body. The `while` and `for` statements help ensure that
programs do reasonable things with boundary conditions.

## Characters

What appears to be a character on the keyboard on screen is of course, like
everything else, stored internally just as a bit pattern. The type `char` is
specifically meant for storing such character data, but any integer type can be
used.

A character written between single quotes represents an integer value equal to
the numerical value of the character in the machine's character set. It is
called a character constant, although it is just another way to write a small
integer.

```c
char c = 'a';
```

Text input or output, regardless of where it originates or where it goes to is
dealt with as streams of characters. A text stream is a sequence of characters
divided into lines; each line consists of zero or more characters followed by a
newline character.

The escape sequences used in string constants are also legal in character
constants, so `'\n'` stands for the value of the newline character, which is
`10` in ASCII. `'\n'` is a single character and in expressions is just an
integer; on the other hand `"\n"` is a string constant that happens to contain
only one character.

## Character Input and Output

`getchar` reads the next input character from a text stream and returns that as
its value and `putchar` prints a character each time it is called.

```c
int c;

c = getchar();
putchar(c);
```

`getchar` returns a distinctive value when there is no more input, a value that
cannot be confused with any real character. This value is called `EOF`, for
"end of file". EOF is an integer defined in `<stdio.h>`, but the specific
numeric value doesn't matter as long as it is not the same as any char value.
By using the symbolic constant, we are assured that nothing in the program
depends on specific numeric value.

## Operators

| Symbol | Meaning      |
| ------ | ------------ |
| `==`   | is equal to  |
| `!=`   | not equal to |

- The precedence of `!=` is higher than that of `=`.

| Symbol | Meaning          |
| ------ | ---------------- |
| `++`   | increment by one |
| `--`   | decrement by one |

- The operators `++` and `--` can be either prefix operators or postfix; these
  two forms have different values in expressions.

| Symbol | Meaning     |
| ------ | ----------- |
| `&&`   | logical and |
| `\|\|` | logical or  |

- `&&` has a higher precedence than `||`.
- Expressions connected by `&&` or `||` are evaluated left to right, and it is
  guaranteed that evaluation will stop as soon as the truth or falsehood is
  known.

## Programs Built

```c
#include <stdio.h>

#define IN 1
#define OUT 0

/* print every word in a new line */
main()
{
    int c, state;

    state = OUT;
    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
    {
        if (c == ' ')
        {
            if (state == IN)
                putchar('\n');
            state = OUT;
        }
        else
        {
            state = IN;
            putchar(c);
        }
    }
}
```

```c
#include <stdio.h>

/* count blanks, tabs and newlines in input */
main()
{
    int c, bl, tb, nl;

    bl = tb = nl = 0;
    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
    {
        if (c == ' ')
            ++bl;
        if (c == '\t')
            ++tb;
        if (c == '\n')
            ++nl;
    }
    printf("%3d blanks\n", bl);
    printf("%3d tabs\n", tb);
    printf("%3d newlines\n", nl);
}
```

## Learning Experience

I'm now getting into the basics of control flow in C and using various data
types. By the end of these sections I had a general grasp of taking character
input from the user and manipulating it as needed.

## References

- [Notes](https://github.com/jNaimXIII/Books/blob/main/The%20C%20Programming%20Language/chapters/01/notes.md)
