---
title: The C Journal - 04. Arrays & Functions
description: >-
  Functions separate logic which can be used without worrying about its
  implementation. These are the building blocks of larger programs.
date: "2023-04-24T06:41:24+06:00"
tags:
  - c
  - the-c-journal
  - journal
categories:
  - the-c-journal
---

Now that I've read the "1.6 Arrays", "1.7 Functions" and "1.5 Arguments -- Call
by Value" sections of _The C Programming Language_ book, I got to write
programs that take advantage of functions and separation of logic as well as
conditional code and arrays.

## Arrays

Arrays are declared by specifying the type of the elements and the number of
elements within square brackets (`[]`) after the name. The declaration `int
n[10]` declares `n` to be an array of 10 integers.

```c
int n[10];
```

Array subscripts always start at zero in C. A subscript can be any integer
expression, which includes integer variables and integer constants. By
definition, `char`s are just small integers, so `char` variable and constants
are identical to `int`s in arithmetic expressions.

```c
n[0] = 0;
```

## Conditionals

In conditional statements the conditions are evaluated in order from the top
until some condition is satisfied; at that point the corresponding statement
part is executed, and the entire construction is finished. If none of the
conditions are satisfied, the statement after the final else is executed if
present. If the final else and statement are omitted, no action takes place.

```c
if (condition)
    statement;
else if (condition)
    statement;
else
    statement;
```

There can be any number of `else if (condition) statement` groups between the
initial `if` and the final `else`.

## Functions

A function provides a convenient way to encapsulate some computation, which can
then be used without worrying about its implementation. With properly designed
functions, it is possible to ignore how a job is done; knowing what is done is
sufficient.

Well-chosen names are good documentation. The "function prototype" declaration
has to agree with the definition and uses of the function declaration. Function
definitions can appear in any order, and in one source file or several,
although no function can be split between files.

```none
return-type function-name(parameter declarations, if any)
{
  declarations
  statements
}
```

We generally use "parameter" for a variable named in the parenthesized list in
a function definition, and "argument" for the value used in a call of the
function. The terms "formal argument" and "actual argument" are also used.

The `return` statement is used to return a value from a function. A function
need not return a value; a return statement with no expression causes control,
but no useful value, to be returned to the caller, as does "falling off the
end" of a function by reaching the terminating right brace. The calling
function can ignore a value returned by a function.

```none
return expression;
```

A return value of zero implies normal termination; non-zero values signal
unusual or erroneous termination conditions.

In C, all function arguments are passed "by value". The called function cannot
directly alter a variable in the calling function; it can only alter its
private, temporary copy. When necessary, it is possible to arrange for a
function to modify a variable in a calling routine. The caller must provide the
address of the variable to be set, and the called function must declare the
parameter to be a pointer and access the variable indirectly through it.

When the name of an array is used as an argument, the value passed to the
function in the location or address of the beginning of the array - there is no
copying of array elements. By subscripting this value, the function can access
and alter any element of the array.

## Programs Built

C has no exponentiation operator. Here's a function that computes `x` to the
`n`th power.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

int power(int m, int n);

/* test power function */
main()
{
    int i;

    for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
        printf("%d %d %d\n", i, power(2, i), power(-3, i));
    return 0;
}

/* power:  raise base to n-th power; n >= 0 */
int power(int base, int n)
{
    int p;

    for (p = 1; n > 0; --n)
        p = p * base;
    return p;
}
```

Here's another program that counts digits, white space, and other characters in
its input text.

```c
#include <stdio.h>

/* count digits, white space, others */
main()
{
    int c, i, nwhite, nother;
    int ndigit[10];

    nwhite = nother = 0;
    for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
        ndigit[i] = 0;

    while ((c = getchar()) != EOF)
        if (c >= '0' && c <= '9')
            ++ndigit[c - '0'];
        else if (c == ' ' || c == '\n' || c == '\t')
            ++nwhite;
        else
            ++nother;

    printf("digits =");
    for (i = 0; i < 10; ++i)
        printf(" %d", ndigit[i]);
    printf(", white space = %d, other = %d\n", nwhite, nother);
}
```

## Learning Experience

Functions are great for encapsulating logic and separating concerns. These can
be used to build complex programs from simple building blocks. Arrays are great
for storing a list of data and iterating over them.

Learning these to new things, I can now write programs that are more complex
and useful.

## References

- [Notes](https://github.com/jNaimXIII/Books/blob/main/The%20C%20Programming%20Language/chapters/01/notes.md)
