---
title: The C Journal - 06. Types of Variables and their Constants
description: >-
  Every variable has a type and some of them have constant representation that
  can be computed at compile time.
date: "2023-05-11T05:36:26+06:00"
tags:
  - c
  - the-c-journal
  - journal
categories:
  - the-c-journal
---

With this I've now started reading the second chapter of _The C Programming
Language_ i.e "Chapter 02 - Types, Operators, and Expressions". I've gone
through the first three sections namely "2.1 Variable Names", "2.2 Data
Types and Sizes" and "2.3 Constants".

## Variable Declarations

Declarations list the variables to be used, and state what type they have and
perhaps what their initial values are.

```c
int i;
char c;
```

The type of an object determines the set of values it can have and what
operations can be performed on it. Objects may be declared `const`, which
prevents them from being changed.

```c
const number = 13;
```

There are now `signed` and `unsigned` forms of all integer types, and notations
for unsigned constants and hexadecimal character constants. Floating-point
operations may be done in single precision; there is also a `long double`
type for extended precision.

Expressions combine variables and constants to produce new values. String
constants may be concatenated at compile time.

## Variable Names

Names are made up of letters and digits; the first character must be a letter.
The underscore "\_" counts as a letter; it is sometimes useful for improving
the readability of long variable names.

```c
int abcd1234;
```

Don't begin variable names with underscore, however, since library routines
often use such names.

Upper case and lower case letters are distinct, so `x` and `X` are two
different names. Traditional C practice is to use lower case for variable
names, and all upper case for symbolic constants.

```c
#define IMPORTANT 1

int n = 0;
int N = 1;
```

At least the first 31 characters of an internal name are significant. For
function names and external variables, the number may be less than 31, because
external names may be used by assemblers and loaders over which the language
has no control. For external names, the standard guarantees uniqueness only for
6 characters and a single case.

```c
int variablesThatAreTooLongAndCrossThat31CharacterLimitWillNotBeDistinct;
int variablesThatAreTooLongAndCrossThat31CharacterLimitWillNotBeDistinctInC;
```

Keywords like `if, else, int, float`, etc., are reserved; you can't use them as
variable names. They must be in lower case.

It's wise to choose variable names that are related to the purpose of the
variable, and that are unlikely to get mixed up typographically. We tend to use
short names for local variables, especially loop indices, and longer names for
external variables.

```c
int age = 18;
```

## Data Types and Sizes

Basic data types in C:

| Type     | Description                                                                 |
| -------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| `char`   | A single type, capable of holding one character in the local character set. |
| `int`    | An integer, typically reflecting the natural size of integers on the.       |
| `float`  | Single-precision floating point                                             |
| `double` | Double-precision floating point                                             |

There are a number of qualifiers that can be applied to basic types e.g `short`
and `long` for integers.

`short` is often 16 bits, `long` 32 bits, and `int` either 16 or 32 bits. Each
compiler is free to choose appropriate sizes for its own hardware, subject only
to the restriction that `short`s and `int`s are at least 16 bits, `long`s are
at least 32 bits, and `short` is no longer than `int`, which is no longer than
`long`.

The qualifier `signed` or `unsigned` may be applied to char or any integer.
`unsigned` numbers are always positive or zero, and obey the laws of arithmetic
modulo $2^n$, where $n$ is the number of bits in the type. `unsigned` `char`
variables have values between 0 and 255, while signed `char`s have values
between `-128` and `127` (in a two's complement machine).

Whether plain `char`s are signed or unsigned is machine-dependant, but
printable characters are always positive.

As with integers, the sizes of floating-point objects are
implementation-defined; `float`, `double`, and `long double` could represent
one, two or three distinct sizes.

The standard headers `<limits.h>` and `<float.h>` contain symbolic constants
for all these sizes, along with other properties of the machine and compiler.

## Constants

An integer constant like 1234 is an `int`. A `long` constant is written with a
terminal `l` (ell) or `L`, as in `1234L`; an integer too big to fit into an
`int` will also be taken as a long.

```c
printf("%d", 111 + 111);
printf("%d", 1000000L + 1000000L);
```

Unsigned constants are written with a terminal `u` or `U`, and the suffix `ul`
or `UL` indicates `unsigned long`.

```c
printf("%f", 1000000UL + 1000000UL);
```

Floating-point constants contain a decimal point (123.4) or an exponent (1e-2)
or both; their type is `double` unless suffixed. The suffixes `f` or `F`
indicate a float constant; `l` or `L` indicates a long double.

```c
printf("%f", 1000000FL + 1000000FL);
```

A leading `0` on an integer constant means octal; a leading `0x` or `0X` means
hexadecimal.

```c
int i = 0xff;
```

Octal and hexadecimal constants may also be followed by `L` to make them `long`
and `U` to make them unsigned.

A character constant is an integer, written as one character within single
quotes, such as `x`. The value of a character constant is the numeric value of
the character in the machine's character set. Character constants participate
in numeric operations just as any other integers, although they are most often
used in comparisons with other characters.

An arbitrary byte-sized bit pattern can be specified by `\000` where `000` is
one to three octal digits or by `\xhh` where `hh` is one or more hexadecimal
digits.

```c
int i = 'xa3';
```

The complete set of escape sequences is:

| Sequence | Name                   |
| :------: | ---------------------- |
|   `\a`   | alert (bell) character |
|   `\b`   | backspace              |
|   `\f`   | formfeed               |
|   `\n`   | newline                |
|   `\r`   | carriage return        |
|   `\t`   | horizontal tab         |
|   `\v`   | vertical tab           |
|   `\v`   | vertical tab           |
|   `\\`   | backslash              |
|   `\?`   | question mark          |
|   `\'`   | single quote           |
|   `\"`   | double quote           |
|  `\000`  | octal number           |
|  `\xhh`  | hexadecimal number     |

The character constant `\0` represent the character with value zero, the null
character. `\0` is often written instead of 0 to emphasize the character
nature of some expression, but the numeric value is just 0.

## Constant Expressions

A `constant expression` is an expression that involves only constants.
Such expressions (constant) may be evaluated during compilation rather than
run-time, and accordingly may be used in any place that a constant can occur.

A `string constant` or `string literal` is a sequence of zero or more
characters surrounded by double quotes. The quotes are not part of the string,
but serve only to delimit it. The same escape sequences used in character
constants apply in strings; `\"` represents the double-quote character.

```c
char c = '\n';
printf("%s", "\n");
```

String constants can be concatenated at compile time. `"hello" " world"` This
is useful for splitting long strings across several source lines.

```c
"Some long line that"
"you can split into two."
```

Technically, a string constant is an array of characters. The internal
representation of a string has a null character `\0` at the end, so the
physical storage required is one more than the number of characters written
between the quotes. This representation means that there is no limit to how
long a string can be, but programs must scan a string completely to determine
its length.

The standard library function `strlen(s)` returns the length of its character
string argument `s`, excluding the terminal `\0`.

## Enums

An enumeration is a list of constant integer values.

```c
enum numbers {
    ONE = 1,
    TWO,
    THREE
}
```

The first name in an `enum` has value 0, the next, and so on, unless explicit
values are specified. If not all values are specified, unspecified values
continue the progression from the last specified value.`

Names in different enumerations must be distinct. Values need not be distinct
in the same enumeration.

Enumerations provide a convenient way to associate constant values with names,
an alternative to `#define` with the advantage that the values can be generated
for you.
